Beneath the Library, John-117 finds himself in the clutches of the Gravemind,
the creature that acts as the controlling intelligence of the Flood.
It is revealed that Thel 'Vadamee has been saved from his fall by the Gravemind as well.
It is within the Gravemind's chamber where the Arbiter and John-117 meet.
The Gravemind announces to John-117 and 'Vadamee that he has much to tell them.
The Prophet of Regret and 2401 Penitent Tangent, the Monitor of Installation 05, appear, both now infected and assimilated into the Gravemind's mass.
They argue back and forth before the Gravemind reveals that Regret's "Great Journey" and Penitent Tangent's "Containment" are one in the same.
Then both the Gravemind and John-117 try to convince 'Vadamee that the Covenant's belief about the Halos is a lie.
They reveal that the Halo installations were created not to save life, but to destroy it, causing the Arbiter to question his faith.
These new revelations, paired with the imminent genocide of the Elites, lead 'Vadamee to reluctantly join John-117 in the mission to stop the ring from being activated.
The Gravemind then sends John-117 to High Charity to retrieve the Index while the Arbiter is sent to the Control Room of Installation 05 to stop the Covenant from activating the ring.
John-117 is teleported inside of High Charity in the middle of a broadcast by the Prophet of Truth.
Upon John-117's arrival, Truth and Mercy flee to the Forerunner Dreadnought, and formally transfer command of the Covenant Military to the Brutes.
Before the prophets make it to the ship, however, they are attacked by the Flood, and Truth leaves Mercy behind to die.
Meanwhile, John-117 pursues the Prophets.
Throughout his pursuit, he kills many Covenant troops, witnesses the conflict between the Elites and Brutes and saves a group of Marines.
At the same time, the Flood, under the control of the Gravemind crash into High Charity using the In Amber Clad. John-117 finds Mercy being infected by the Flood, and the Prophet tells the Spartan that Truth is going to Earth to "finish what we started."
Cortana implores John-117 to pursue Truth, but he is hesitant as his mission to retrieve the Index is not complete.
Cortana devises a plan to complete his mission by detonating the crashed In Amber Clad to destroy the ring if it is activated.
This plan, however, requires Cortana to stay on board High Charity.
John-117 boards the Dreadnought through an energy conduit before promising Cortana that he will come back for her.
